The Project Gutenberg EBook of Zywila, by Adam Mickiewicz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Zywila
       Powiastka z Dziejów Litewskich

Author: Adam Mickiewicz

Translator: Wladyslaw Mickiewicz

Release Date: February 24, 2009 [EBook #28168]

Language: Polish

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZYWILA ***




Produced by Jimmy O'Regan (Produced from images kindly
made available by Google Books/Harvard University)









ŻYWILA



ŻYWILA


POWIASTKA Z DZIEJÓW LITEWSKICH


PRZEZ

ADAMA MICKIEWICZA

ODSZUKANA I WYDANA

Z TŁÓMACZENIEM FRANCUZKIEM


PRZEZ


WŁADYSŁAWA MICKIEWICZA


Ozdobiona rycina.


PARYŻ
KSIĘGARNIA LUXEMBURGSKA

16, ULICA DE TOURNON.
1866

Zabrania się przedruk.



PRZEDMOWA.

Przyjaciel lat dziecinnych ojca mojego, przypomniawszy sobie w tych
czasach, iż jeden z najpiérwszych jego utworów był drukowany w
ówczesnych pismach perjodycznych wileńskich, odszukał go i przysłał mi
kopję, którą podzielić się z publicznością poczytuję sobie za obowiązek.

Jest to zaledwo szkic tylko, ale miłośnicy poezji jak miłośnicy sztuk
pięknych zawsze wyłączném uczuciem otaczali szkice ręką mistrzów
kreślone. Powiastkę dzisiejszą uważać można za pierwszy rys wielkiego
poematu. Żywila ukazała się bezimiennie, w Ne 123 Tygodnika Wileńskiego,
dnia 28 lutego 1819 r. (Ojciec mój wówczas zaledwo 20 rok życia kończył)
pisana językiem starodawnym, do tytułu dodaną była wskazówka, że podanie
wyjęto ze starożytnych rękopismów polskich, udzielonych redakcji przez
P. S. F. Z. Taż sama myśl natchnęła póżniéj Grażynę i Wallenroda, a
widać w niéj nawet tenże sam sposób obrobienia przedmiotu.

Pod gniotem cenzury podejrzliwéj, poeci nasi często byli zmuszeni
uciekać się do roli bajko-pisarza który nie mogąc wprowadzić na scenę
ludzi, daru mowy zwierzętom udziela, i tak za pomocą przypowieści,
wykłada prawdy, lub rozwija uczucia, wygnane z dziedziny życia
politycznego. Z wyłącznym talentem i dowcipem używał tego sposobu Juljan
Niemcewicz. Ojciec mój, kreśląc obowiązki względem ojczyzny, nieraz
bohaterów poematów swoich szukał w odległych dość epokach, aby ich
słowa, zupełnie dla rodaków przezroczyste, w oczach nieprzyjaciela
zdawały się być tylko prostą historją. Takie utwory utrzymywały miłość
Ojczyzny i nienawiść obcego jarzma.

    Władysław Mickiewicz.

Paryż, 21o maja 1886 r.




ZYWILA



ŻYWILA.

Grekowie i rzymskiéy historyey pisarze dosyć nam ku zbudowaniu podali, o
cnotliwych a prawie męzkiego serca białych-głowach, więc i Litwie naszéy
na podobnych nie zeszło przykładach; gdyby iedno kto w dzieiach ony
wypatrzyć, a złotém piórem okryślić chciał: ale wżdy widząc iż nikt o
tém iako żywo nie myśli, wziątem przed się ile ze mnie będzie, krótką
historyykę ze staroświeckich xiąg wyyętą, po prostu wam przełożyć.

Około lata Pańskiego 1400, panowało w Nowogródku, Słonimie i Lidzie,
możne i potężne xiąże na imie Koryat, u tego za się była córka
iedynaczka: arcy-nadobna niewiasta; zwano ią Żywila, to iest Diana: gdyż
i gładkością prawie cudną boginiey tey równała się, i my słano
pospolicie, iż ku małżeńskim ślubom, znaczne wstręty miała; bo gdy
xiążęta, a pany możne z dalekich stron przysyłali posły, upraszaiąc ią
sobie ku małżeństwu, wszystkim stale wzbraniała się: stad wieść szła, iż
w panieńskim stanie do końca żywota bydź chce. Ano wcale inaksze były
tych uporów przyczyny. Xiężniczka Żywila od czasu nieiakiego rozmiłowała
się skrycie litwina Poraya, męża z rycerskiém sercem, który przez swe
wyśmienite przewagi woienne mocno był xięciu Koryatowi spodobany; i w
niebycie iego rząd nad wszém państwem sprawował, zkąd nie trudno mu było
z lubownicą swoią taiemne schadzki miewać, gdzieby miłości swoie
wynurzali i wzaiemnie się pocieszali.

Stało się, iż krótko potém wrócił z woyny xiążę Koryat, i zasmucił się
niepomału, wielką w kochanéy córce swoiey upatruiąc przemianę. Ony łzy,
ony wzdychania, ony bladości, ony lękania się i drżenia ustawiczne przed
oycem, dały mu wszystko, iako było, wyrozumiéć. «Córko odrodna, zawołał,
na to przywiodła cię rozpusta a wszeteczność, iż zbańbiłaś na wieki dom
oycowski, idź precz z przed oblicza mego; i ty, i kto cię na tę niecnotę
zaprawił, śmiercią okrutna pomrzecie.» Jakoż, wytrąbiono z urzędu po
mieście, iź ktoby wymienił gamrata xięzniczki Żywili, abo o nim lice
iakowe powziął, bogato udarowan odeydzie. Alić trąbienie na świat
poszło, gdyż nikt nie był, coby o skrytych miłościach onych cóś
wiedział, abo wiedząc Koryatowi doniósł. Xiężniczka Żywila, była w
szczególném zamiłowaniu u sług i poddanych swoich, a na rycerza Poraya
który pokątnie nieszczęścia swego płakał, a na dworze w wesołą twarz
ubrać się umiał, żadne iako żywo nie przyszło podeyrzenie.

Widząc tedy Koryat, iż wszystkie jego posłuchy i śledzenia, nieskutkuią,
a w iedno nic się obracają, mocno na córkę swoją nastawał, wielkie grozy
czyniąc; ale ona statecznie w cierpliwości stała. «Oycze móy, pry, znam
iżem winna znacznéy winy, karay mię, otoć iestem, znam iżem niegodna
znaleść u ciebie miłosierdzie; przed się drugiéy duszy niewinnéy gubić z
sobą nie mogę, abych ciężéy jeszcze Bogów nieobraziła.» Xiąże zatém
spuścił nieco z onych pierwszych srogości, iął się pochlebstwa, i złość
w mowie iedwabnéy przykrywaiąc, obiecował iéy dobrem słowem, iż grzech
przepuści; aby iedno wszetecznika, coby zacz był? mógł wiedzieć.

Żywila milczała, łzami i szlochaniem odpowiadaiąc. Xiąże tedy
zagniewawszy się gniewem wielkim, kazał iedyną córę swoją, w łańcuchy
wsadzić i do lochu pod straż wrzucić, skąd miała bydź nie długo
wywiedziona do tracenia.

I maż kto style? aby podołał opisać lamęty i ciężkie smętki a płacze,
które stąd po wszém mieście powstały; bo xiężniczkę Żywilę naród w
przedniey, iakoby bóstwo iakie miał uczciwości, i iakoby matkę kochaną
miłował, iż rada ubogie ludzie wspierała, a srogi przeciwko poddanym
umysł xiążęcy łagodziła.

Szedł tedy lud w gromadach wielkich na dworzec pański, gorzko płacząc a
żebrząc miłości, ze strony ubogiéy xiężniczki. Przed się nic uprosić nie
możno.

Onego czasu także, na pograniczu trwały woyny między ruskimi kniaziami a
Litwą. Iwan uźbierawszy siła woysk wszelakich, miasta ubiegał, ogniem i
mieczem następował; tak iż nim się o tém wieść rozbiegła, mnogość ludu a
krwie uczciwéy napsował, za się szybko nadciągnąwszy, niedaleko miasta
obozy rozłożył.

Działo się to dniem przed świętami Peruna; nazaiutrz miano tracić
xiężniczkę Żywilę.

Poray od Koryata z garstką przebranego rycerstwa słany był, ażeby
wstręty iakowe nieprzyjacielowi czynić, zaczemby obrony przyzwoite u
murów nastawiono. Ten, chociaż z daleko ogromnieyszym a srogim sobie
napastnikiem sprawę miał, przed się serca nietracąc, na ludzie iego bez
sprawy lada jako ciągnące, z taką mocą a gwałtem wielkim padł, iż ie na
głowę poraziwszy do kosza wegnał, i przyszłaby dnia owego zguba
ostateczna na Rusiny, gdyby noc potrzebie końca niedała.

Poray nic nie mieszkaiąc, nieprzyiacioły woyski swemi obsaczył, sam do
miasta z radośną nowiną bieżał. Odprawowano w mieście wesele wielkie.
Koryat naprzeciw Poraya, z niemałym pocztem wyiechał, cześć mu wszolaką
wyrządzaiąc i obrońcą swoim zowąc, więc i do zamku społem na ucztę z
sobą zaprosił, a gdy się sami iedni znależli, Poray iako stał, upadł do
nóg xiążęcia, szerokiemi słowy wierność a stateczność swoią wywodząc:
«Atoć xiążę i panie móy, poraziłem nieprzyiacioły twoye porażką znaczną,
i dadzą li Bogowie do małego szczętu wygubić ich, w tém za się to za
nagrodę sowitą miéć chcę, abyś córki twéy iedynéy nie tracił, a mnie ią
z łaski swéy w małżeństwo oddał; za którą łaskę twoią, krwią i
maiętnością, ile ze mnie iest, odsługować niechybię.» Xiąże wmiast
dobroci niechęć pokazował, i takiemi słowy rzekł: «Porayu, napełniłeś
mię weselem i smętkiem; raduię się słysząc o tak zacnych posługach
twoich, a za się przecz wymagasz co iest nad moc moią? Owe święte a
wielkie przodki nasze, Xiążęta Litewskie, wiesz jako córek swoich
poddanym za mąż niedawali, a źle z tym jest, kto krwie swéy niedbały, na
lekkość ią puszcza; więc i z tym, kto się powodzeniem w pychę wbiia a
zbytnie wyżéy niż nań przystało, sięga. Lepak i to imo się puszczaiąc,
córka moia wyrodna domu xiążęcego godność iście splamiła... Wierzyć nie
chcę, abyś iéy do takowéy sromoty przywódcą był. Wżdy skądby się tak
nagła ku téy wszetecznicy miłość twoia wzięła? Nierozumiem. Zaś i z tych
gołych podeyrzeń oczyścić się musisz; na ten czas obaczę co z tém mam
czynić.»

Po rozhoworze takowym, rozeszli się obadwa na pozór łaskawie, obadwa
gniewy wewnątrz złamali i pokryli. Poray niewdzięcznością pańską do
żywego poruszony, a prawie gromem rażony, przeczuł iż zło nad nim wisi,
zemstę przeto glęboko w sercu zasadzoną warzył. Xiąże też rozumiał o
Porayu iż krom wątpliwości, przez ów z xięźniczką nierząd i przez
rycerskie szczęście, stolicę pana swego chce posiąść. Dla tego
przemyślał iakoby mu żywot wzięty bydź mógł, teraz uczynić tego nie
śmieiąc, snać by się rozruch niestał pomiędzy ludem, który Poraya po
mieście obrońcą wykrzykiwał; zaczém ku wytłuczeniu do reszty
nieprzyyaciół, prawica Poraya ieszcze potrzebną była.

Działo się to w noc przed świątkami Peruna; nazaiutrz miała bydź tracona
xiężniczka Żywiła.

Iwan tymczasem porażony i ściśniony srodze, wyglądał rychło mu czas
ostateczny zabłyśnie i wszelkiéy nadziei próźen, biedził się, niewiedząc
iaką lepszą radę wziąść przed się. Gdy oto drabanci obozowi wbieżeli
mówiąc, iż mąż nieiaki, w czarnéy zbroiey do obozu iachał, a słuchania
xiążęcego prosi. Kazano go wpuścić. Szedł więc i rzekł: «Kniaziu Iwanie,
Poray iestem, którym ludzie twe dwakroć pobił i ciebie obsaczonego
zewsząd trzymam, a otoć przychodzę, oddać w ręce twe, miasto z xiążęciem
iego, i ze wszystkiemi dostatki i woyskiem iego. Masz mnie iedno
przysiądź przysięgą wielką, iż ludzi mieczem i ogniem psować nie
będziesz, a iż xiężniczka pewna, w mieście więziona, żoną mi dana bydź
musi ze wszelakiem bezpieczeństwem.»

Już się zabierało na brzask przededniem świąt Peruna, a dnia onego miała
bydź tracona xiężniczka Żywila.

Nagle hałas i zgiełk nad spodziw wielki rozszedł się po wszem mieście;
co żwawsi obywatele, zastawiaiąc się onéy gwałtownéy napaści, gardła
dali. Innych trwogą potłumiono, tak iż poddanność nieprzyiaciołom
uczynić musieli.

Poray wybiia więzienie i znayduie (zgroza mówić) ulubioną swoią, bladą,
półżywą, na lichém posłaniu, ladaiako porzuconą, w ciemnice. Obaczywszy
Poraya, zemglała.

Niesiono ią zatém na ulicę, aby iakokolwiek ocucić, a ducha iéy
przywołać. Ratowano, a ona się nieczuła; zbiegł się lud to widząc, i
stało się wołanie i krzyk wielki; ano przed się nieczuła. Nareszcie
wdzięczne oce otwieraiąc cudowała się mocno, widząc w około ciżbę ludu i
zbroyne męże nieprzyiacielskie. Na on czas Poray przystąpiwszy, rzekł:
«Złóż twoie boiażni naymilsza, to są boiownicy Iwana, zemściciela krzywd
naszych, którego opieka z nas nie zeydzie.» Żywila to usłyszawszy,
dobrze znowu nie zemglała, potém za się nagle miecz od boku Poraya
wychwyciwszy, tak silnie sztychem w piersi mu uderzyła, iż na skróś
przepadł, «Zdrayco, wołaiąc, tak li u ciebie małą była oyczyzna, iż ią
dla trochę téy gładkości zaprzedałeś? człowieku beze czci, tak li
odpłaciłeś za moie stateczne miłości? A za wy obywatelowie, przecz
stoicie iakoby nie do was mówiono, przecz nie obrócicie na tych oto
zbóyców gniewu i zemsty waszéy?» To mówiąc, z mieczem na nieprzyiacioły
blisko stoiące godziła; czém lud wszystek, iakoby kto ogniem po nich
rzucił, poruszony, dopadłszy co kto mógł, z broniami i mieczami, na
Rusiny, nic takowego niespodziewaiące się, bieżał. Wytępiono ich moc
wielką, po domach i ulicach, resztę żywcem brano a więziono. Żywila
przybiegłszy kędy Koryat z tarasu świéżo wypuszczony stał, «Oycze móy!»
zawołała i padła bez duszy.

Pochowano ią pod Mendogową górą, kędy kopiec usypano i drzewa na
pamiątkę sadzono. Staruszkowie dziękuiąc Panu Bogu wszechmogącemu iż ich
na hańbę a urągowisko nieprzyiaciela niepodał, powtarzaią dziatkom swym
imię Żywili.

KONIEC.




ZYWILA

LÉGENDE LITHUANIENNE

PAR
ADAM MICKIEWICZ

RETROUVÉE ET PUBLIÉE,

TEXTE ET TRADUCTION EN REGARD;

PAR
LADISLAS MICKIEWICZ

Avec une eau-forte

PARIS

LIBRAIRIE DU LUXEMBOURG
16 RUE DE TOURNON.
1866.

Tous droits réservés.




PRÉFACE.

Un ami d'enfance de mon père s'étant rappelé dernièrement que l'une de
ses premières productions avait été insérée dans une revue de Vilna, la
fit rechercher; et il vient de m'en envoyer une copie, que je crois
devoir communiquer au public.

Ce n'est guère qu'une esquisse; mais les amis des belles-lettres, ainsi
que les amis des arts, ont toujours eu une curiosité pieuse pour les
esquisses des maîtres. On peut considérer le présent écrit comme le
canevas d'un poëme. Il a paru anonyme dans le no 123 du Tygodnik
Wilenski du 28 février 1819 (mon père n'avait alors que 20 ans). Le
style en est archaïque. Et le titre portait l'indication que la légende
était tirée d'anciens manus- crits polonais communiqués à la rédaction
par P. S. F. Z. C'est la même pensée qui a inspiré Grazyna, puis
Wallenrod, et c'est aussi le même procédé.

Sous l'empire d'une censure ombrageuse, l'écrivain patriote s'est trouvé
souvent réduit au rôle du fabuliste qui, dans l'impossibilité de mettre
les hommes en scène, fait parler les animaux et trouve ainsi le moyen de
produire par l'apologue la vérité proscrite de la vie politique. Et
c'est ce que notre Niemcewicz exécuta avec tant de talent et d'esprit.
Adam Mickiewicz, afin d'exprimer les devoirs envers la patrie a parfois
choisi ses personnages à une époque assez éloignée pour que leurs
paroles, transparentes aux yeux des compatriotes, ne semblassent que de
l'histoire ancienne aux yeux de l'ennemi. Des créations pareilles ont
entretenu l'amour de la patrie polonaise et la haine de l'oppression
étrangère.

Ladislas Mickiewicz.

Paris, 21 Mai 1860.




ZYWILA

Les Grecs et les Romains, dans leurs histoires, nous ont transmis, en
suffisance pour notre édification, des actes de femmes vertueuses et
d'un cœur quasi viril. Notre Lithuanie, elle aussi, ne manquerait point
de semblables exemples, si quelqu'un eût su les découvrir dans ses
fastes et les retracer d'une plume d'or: mais voyant, hélas! qu'il n'y a
pour y songer âme qui vive, j'ai pris à tâche, autant du moins que je le
puis, de vous présenter une courte légende tirée des anciennes
chroniques.

Vers l'an du Seigneur 1400, il régnait à Nowogrodek, Slonim et Lida, un
riche et puissant prince nommé Koryat. Il avait une fille unique d'une
étonnante beauté et qu'on appelait Zywila, c'est-à-dire Diane; car, par
sa grâce merveilleuse, elle égalait presque cette déesse et l'on pensait
communément qu'elle éprouvait pour le mariage une vive répugnance;
vainement, en effet, des princes et de puissants seigneurs avaient-ils
envoyé de contrées lointaines leurs ambassadeurs demander sa main: à
chacun elle avait opposé le même constant refus. Cela donna lieu au
bruit qu'elle voulait demeurer jusqu'à la fin de ses jours dans l'état
de virginité. Mais son obstination tenait à de tous autres motifs.
Depuis un certain temps, la princesse Zywila s'était secrètement
énamourée du lithuanien Poray, homme au cœur héroïque, que ses éclatants
succès à la guerre avaient placé très-avant dans la faveur de Koryat, si
bien qu'en son absence c'est lui qui gouvernait l'empire. Aussi ne lui
était-il pas difficile de se ménager avec sa bien-aimée de fréquents et
mystérieux rendez-vous où ils s'exprimaient leur amour et se consolaient
mutuellement.

Il advint que le prince Koryat, au retour d'une rapide expédition,
s'attrista grandementen remarquant un profond changement dans sa fille
chérie. Ces larmes, ces soupirs, ces pâleurs, ce trouble, ces frissons
continuels devant son père, lui révélèrent tout: « Fille dénaturée,
s'écria-t-il, voilà donc que l'inconduite et le désordre font fait
déshonorer pour toujours la maison paternelle; disparais de ma présence;
toi et celui qui t'a induite à mal, vous périrez d'une mort cruelle. »
On proclama officiellement par la ville, au son de la trompette, que
quiconque dénoncerait l'amant de la princesse, ou fournirait à cet égard
des indications, s'en retournerait richement récompensé. Mais autant en
emporta le vent, puisque personne ne savait rien de ces secrètes amours,
ou le sachant, ne les dévoila à Koryat. La princesse Zywila avait été
prise en singulière affection par ses serviteurs et sujets, et quant au
guerrier Poray, qui pleurait à la dérobée son malheur, il savait montrer
à la cour un joyeux visage et nul ne le soupçonnait.

Koryat, voyant que toute sa surveillance et ses recherches demeuraient
infructueuses et n'aboutissaient à rien, tourna ses efforts contre sa
fille et n'épargna point la menace; mais la patience de celle-ci ne se
lassait pas. « Mon père, lui disait-elle, j'avoue que je mérite un lourd
châtiment; punis moi, me voici; je n'ignore pas que je suis indigne de
ta miséricorde; je ne puis pourtant entraîner dans ma perte une autre
âme innocente, de peur d'offenser les dieux plus grièvement encore. » Le
prince alors se départit un peu de ses premières rigueurs, et il essaya
de la prendre par la douceur; dissimulant sa colère sous de soyeuses
paroles, il lui promettait de lui pardonner sa faute, si seulement il
lui était donné de connaître le nom du séducteur.

Zywila se taisait, ne répondant que par ses larmes et ses sanglots. Le
prince, transporté de fureur, ordonna d'enchaîner sa fille unique et de
la jeter sous bonne garde au fond d'un cachot d'où elle ne devait sortir
que pour être bientôt conduite au supplice.

Qui pourrait décrire les lamentations, le violent chagrin et les larmes
dont fut remplie la ville entière: naguère la nation considérait la
princesse Zywila comme une déesse de l'honnêteté et l'aimait à l'égal
d'une mère adorée, car elle se plaisait à soulager le pauvre monde et
elle tempérait l'humeur du prince envers ses sujets.

Le peuple en masse se pressait dans la cour du palais, pieurant
amèrement et mendiant pitié pour la pauvre princesse, sans pouvoir rien
obtenir.

En ce même temps, les frontières étaient troublées par les incursions
que les princes ruthéniens faisaient en Lithuanie. Iwan, ayant rassemblé
force soldats de toute espèce, parcourait le pays, en promenant par les
villes le fer et le feu. Avant que la nouvelle ne s'en fût répandue, une
foule d'honnêtes habitants avaient déjà souffert, et lui, par une marche
rapide, s'était avancé jusqu'à la capitale, à proximité de laquelle il
établit son camp.

Cela se passait la veille des fêtes de Perun: le lendemain devait avoir
lieu le supplice de la princesse Zywila.

Poray fut détaché par Koryat avec une poignée de guerriers d'élite pour
arrêter l'ennemi, pendant qu'on ferait sur les remparts les préparatifs
nécessaires. Quoiqu'il eût affaire à un envahisseur cruel et de beaucoup
supérieur en nombre, il ne perdit pas courage, mais il fondit avec une
telle impétuosité sur les troupes qui avançaient sans ordre qu'il les
tailla en pièces et les rejeta derrière leurs retranchements de
chariots; cette journée aurait été témoin de la destruction totale des
Ruthéniens, si la nuit n'eût mis fin au combat.

Poray, sans perdre de temps, enveloppa des siens l'armée ennemie, puis
courut de sa personne porter à la ville cette heureuse nouvelle. La
ville célébra de grandes réjouissances. Koryat alla au devant de Poray,
avec un nombreux cortége, et lui rendit toute sorte d'honneurs en le
proclamant son sauveur. Il l'invita à un banquet au château: dès qu'ils
furent seuls, Poray se laissa tomber de son long aux pieds du prince et
lui rappela en détails sa fidélité et sa constance: « Mon prince et
seigneur, voici que j'ai taillé ton ennemi en pièces et les dieux te
donneront de le détruire entièrement; je me regarderai comme amplement
récompensé si tu ne fais point périr ta fille unique, mais si au
contraire tu daignes me l'accorder pour femme; et en reconnaissance de
cette grâce, je te consacrerai mes biens et ma vie. » Le prince, au lieu
de lui témoigner de la bonté, laissa percer son mauvais vouloir et
répliqua en ces termes: « Poray, tu m'as à la fois rempli de joie et de
chagrin; je me réjouis à l'énumération de tes dignes services, mais tu
réclames une récompense qu'il n'est point en mon pouvoir d'accorder. Tu
sais que nos saints et grands ancêtres, les princes lithuaniens, ne
donnaient point leur fille en mariage à leurs sujets. Malheur à
quiconque, sans respect pour son sang, dispose de sa personne à la
légère! Malheur aussi à celui que le succès enorgueillit et auquel il
inspire de trop hautes visées! En laissant de côté ces considérations,
ma fille dénaturée a terni l'honneur de ma maison princière. Je me
refuse à croire que tu l'aies précipitée dans cette honte. Mais d'où
vient ton subit amour pour cette criminelle? Je ne le comprends pas. Il
faut que tu te laves de ce simple soupçon, et je verrai alors ce qu'il
me restera à faire. »

Après cet entretien, ils se séparèrent; très-satisfaits en apparence,
ils dissimulaient tous deux leur fureur. Poray blessé au vif de
l'ingratitude de son maître et comme frappé de la foudre, pressentit
qu'un malheur était suspendu sur sa tête. C'est pourquoi il se résolut à
une vengeance que déjà il couvait au fond de son cœur. Le prince pensait
de son côté qu'évidemment, par cette relation coupable avec la
princesse, jointe à ses succès militaires, il voulait s'emparer de sa
propre capitale. Il réfléchit donc aux moyens de lui enlever la vie,
n'osant le faire à l'instant même, de peur qu'il ne s'en suivît un
mouvement parmi le peuple qui, dans la ville, acclamait Poray comme son
sauveur; de plus, jusqu'à l'entier écrasement de l'ennemi, le bras de
Poray lui était encore nécessaire.

Cela se passait dans la nuit d'avant la fête de Perun: le lendemain
devait avoir lieu le supplice de la princesse Zywila.

Pendant ce temps, Iwan, défait et étroitement resserré, s'attendait à
voir arriver le moment fatal; privé de tout espoir, il se tourmentait
sans savoir qu'entreprendre. Tout à coup les gardes du camp arrivent lui
dire qu'un guerrier couvert d'une noire armure est arrivé au camp et
réclame une audience du prince. Ordre fut donné de l'introduire. Il
s'avança et dit: « Kniaz Iwan, je suis Poray qui deux fois ai défait tes
soldats et par qui tu es cerné de toutes parts. Je viens remettre dans
tes mains la ville et son prince avec toutes ses richesses et son armée.
Il faut seulement que tu t'engages par un serment solennel à ne pas
anéantir la population par le fer et le feu, et à me donner pour femme
en toute sécurité certaine princesse détenue dans la ville.

Déjà allait poindre l'aurore du jour de la fête de Perun, et ce jour-là
devait avoir lieu le supplice de la princesse Zywila.

Soudain un fracas et un tumulte inattendus s'élèvent dans la ville; les
citoyens les plus énergiques périssent en s'opposant à cette violente
irruption; dominés par la crainte, les autres font leur soumission à
l'ennemi.

Poray brise les portes de la prison et trouve, c'est honteux à dire, sa
bien-aimée, pâle, à moitié morte, abandonnée sur une couche grossière
dans un obscur cachot. A la vue de Poray, elle perdit connaissance.

On la transporta dans la rue pour la faire revenir à elle et rappeler
ses esprits. On s'empressait autour d'elle, sans qu'elle sortit de son
évanouissement; à ce spectacle, le peuple accourut; il y eut des
plaintes et de grands cris: elle demeurait privée de sentiment. A la fin
elle ouvrit des yeux reconnaissants et fut étonnée de voir le peuple en
foule et des ennemis en armes. Poray s'approchant lui dit: « Bannis
toute crainte, ma très-chère, ce sont les guerriers d'iwan, les vengeurs
de nos offenses, dont la protection ne nous quittera plus. » A ces mots,
Zywila fut près de s'évanouir de nouveau; soudain elle tira du fourreau
le glaive de Poray et en dirigea la pointe contre sa poitrine avec tant
de force qu'elle le transperça d'outre en outre. « Traître,
s'écria-t-elle, la patrie était donc si peu de chose à tes yeux que tu
l'as vendue pour un peu de cette beauté; homme sans honneur, c'est ainsi
que tu m'as payée de mon constant amour! Et vous, citoyens, qui restez
immobiles, comme si cela ne s'adressait point à vous, ne tournerez-vous
pas contre ces brigands votre colère et vos vengeances? » En achevant
ces mots, elle se jeta avec son glaive sur l'ennemi le plus proche: à
cette vue, le peuple remué comme si on l'eût aspergé de flammes, et
prenant ce qui lui tombait sous la main, courut avec des armes et des
glaives sur les Ruthéniens qui ne s'attendaient à rien de semblable. On
en extermina un grand nombre dans les maisons et dans les rues; on prit
Iwan et l'on emprisonna le reste. Zywila accourut sur la terrasse où se
tenait Koryat qu'on venait de délivrer: « Mon père! » s'écria-t-elle, et
elle tomba sans vie.

On l'enterra au pied de la montagne de Mendog; à cet endroit on éleva un
tumulus et l'on planta des arbres en souvenir. Les vieillards, en
rendant grâce à Dieu tout puissant de ne pas les avoir livrés à la honte
et aux moqueries de l'ennemi, répètent à leurs enfants le nom de Zywila.

FIN.


Paris.—Typ. Rouge fréres, Dunon et Fresné, rue du Four-St-Germain, 43.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Zywila, by Adam Mickiewicz

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZYWILA ***

***** This file should be named 28168-0.txt or 28168-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/6/28168/

Produced by Jimmy O'Regan (Produced from images kindly
made available by Google Books/Harvard University)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
